# Introduction 

A transport-layer protocol provides for <font style="color:#C12869">logical communication</font> between application processes running on different hosts.

Transport-layer protocols are implemented in the end systems but not in network routers. On the sending side, the transport layer converts the application-layer messages it receives from a sending application process into transport-layer packets, known as transport-layer segments.

Internet makes two distinct transport-layer protocols available to the application layer. One of these protocols is UDP (User Datagram Protocol), which provides an unreliable, connectionless service to the invoking application. The second of these protocols is TCP (Transmission Control Protocol), which provides a reliable, connection-oriented service to the invoking application.

---
**A quick look at internet's ip address**

The Internet’s network-layer protocol has a name—IP, for Internet Protocol. IP provides logical communication between hosts. The IP service model is a best-effort delivery service. This means that IP makes its “best effort” to deliver segments between communicating hosts, but it makes no guarantees ,

For these reasons, IP is said to be an unreliable service

---

# Services :


- The most fundamental responsibility of UDP and TCP is to <font style="color:lightgreen">extend IP’s delivery service</font> between two end systems to a delivery service between two processes running on the end systems. Extending host-to-host delivery to process-to-process delivery is called transport-layer multiplexing and demultiplexing.

- UDP and TCP also provide 
	- Integrity checking by including <font style="color:cornflowerblue">error detection</font> fields in their segment's headers. 

**UDP Services :**
- Process-to-process data delivery 
- Error checking—are the only two services that UDP provides! 
- In particular, like IP, UDP is an unreliable service—it does not guarantee that data sent by one process will arrive intact (or at all!) to the destination process

**TCP Services :**

- Provides reliable data transfer. 
- Using 
	- Flow control, 
	- Sequence numbers, 
	- Acknowledgments, 
	- Timers ,
TCP ensures that data is delivered from sending process to receiving process, correctly and in order. 

- TCP thus converts IP’s unreliable service between end systems into a reliable data transport service between processes. 
- TCP also provides <font style="color:cornflowerblue">congestion control.</font>

---
