Obsidian Vault/SEMESTER-V/COMPUTER NETWORKS/UNIT-1/4.Network core Packet switchingxCircuit switching.md, before:

# THE NETWORK CORE:

Having examined the Internet’s edge, let us now delve more deeply inside the network core—the mesh of packet switches and links that interconnects the Internet’s end systems.
![[Pasted image 20220808110353.png]]

----
There are two fundamental approaches to moving data through a network of links and switches: 

- <font style="color:violet">Packet switching</font>
- <font style="color:violet">Circuit switching </font>

## Packet switching :
To send a message from a source end system to a destination end system, the source breaks long messages into smaller chunks of data known as <font style="color:lightblue"> packets</font>. 

Between source and destination, each packet travels through communication links and packet switches (for which there are two predominant types, routers and link-layer switches). 

Packets are transmitted over each communication link at a rate equal to the full transmission rate of the link. 

So, if a source end system or a packet switch is 
- Sending  a packet of <font style="color:red"> L</font> bits 
- Over a link with transmission rate <font style="color:red"> R</font> bits/sec, 
- Then the time to transmit the packet is <font style="color:red"> L/R</font> seconds.

<font style="color:ORANGE"> Store-and-Forward Transmission:</font>

Most packet switches use store-and-forward transmission at the inputs to the links. Store-and-forward transmission means that the packet switch must receive the entire packet before it can begin to transmit the first bit of the packet onto the outbound link. 

![[Pasted image 20220808120140.png]]


To explore store-and-forward transmission in more detail, consider a simple network consisting of two end systems connected by a single router, as shown in Figure 1.11. 

A router will typically have many incident links, since its job is to switch an incoming packet onto an outgoing link; in this simple example, the router has the rather simple task of transferring a packet from one (input) link to the only other attached link. In this example, the source has three packets, each consisting of L bits, to send to the destination. At the snapshot of time shown in Figure 1.11, the source has transmitted some of packet 1, and the front of packet 1 has already arrived at the router. Because the router employs store-and-forwarding, at this instant of time, the router cannot transmit the bits it has received; instead it must first <font style="color:pink">buffer</font> (i.e., “store”) the packet’s bits. Only after the router has received all of the packet’s bits can it begin to transmit (i.e., “forward”) the packet onto the outbound link. 


To gain some insight into store-and-forward transmission, 

Let’s now calculate the amount of time that elapses from when the source begins to send the packet until the destination has received the entire packet. ( Ignoring propagation delay—the time it takes for the bits to travel across the wire at near the speed of light.)``

The source begins to transmit at time 0; 
	``	At time L/R seconds, the source has transmitted the entire packet, and the entire packet has been received and stored at the router (since there is no propagation delay). 
	
	``	At time L/R seconds, since the router has just received the entire packet, it can begin to transmit the packet onto the outbound link towards the destination; 
		
    at time 2L/R, the router has transmitted the entire packet, 
    and the entire packet has been received by the destination. 
    Thus, the total delay is 2L/R.

If the switch instead forwarded bits as soon as they arrive (without first receiving the entire packet), then the total delay would be L/R since bits are not held up at the router. But, as we will discuss in Section 1.4, routers need to receive, store, and process the entire packet before forwarding. 

---

<font style="color:coral">Now let’s calculate the amount of time that elapses from when the source begins to send the first packet until the destination has received all three packets.</font> 

As before, at time L/R, the router begins to forward the first packet. But also at time L/R the source will begin to send the second packet, since it has just finished sending the entire first packet. Thus, at time 2L/R, the destination has received the first packet and the router has received the second packet. Similarly, at time 3L/R, the destination has received the first two packets and the router has received the third packet. Finally, at time 4L/R the destination has received all three packets! 

---

Let’s now consider the general case of sending one packet from source to destination over a path consisting of N links each of rate R (thus, there are N-1 routers between source and destination). Applying the same logic as above, we see that the end-to-end delay is: 

   $$d_{end-to-end} =N\frac{L}{R}$$ ---

 ### Queuing Delays and Packet Loss:

Each packet switch has multiple links attached to it. For each attached link, the packet switch has an output buffer (also called an output queue), which stores packets that the router is about to send into that link.

![[Pasted image 20220808130438.png]]

The output buffers play a key role in packet switching. If an arriving packet needs to be transmitted onto a link but finds the link busy with the transmission of another packet, the arriving packet must wait in the output buffer. Thus, in addition to the store-and-forward delays, packets suffer output buffer queuing delays. These delays are variable and depend on the level of congestion in the network. Since the amount of buffer space is finite, an arriving packet may find that the buffer is completely full with other packets waiting for transmission. In this case, <font style="color:lightblue">packet loss</font> will occur—either the arriving packet or one of the already-queued packets will be dropped.

---
### Forwarding Tables and Routing Protocols :

But how does the router determine which link it should forward the packet onto?

Packet forwarding is actually done in different ways in different types of computer networks.

In the Internet, every end system has an address called an IP address. When a source end system wants to send a packet to a destination end system, the source includes the destination’s IP address in the packet’s header. As with postal addresses, this address has a hierarchical structure. When a packet arrives at a router in the network, the router examines a portion of the packet’s destination address and forwards the packet to an adjacent router. More specifically, each router has a <font style="color:lightblue">forwarding table</font> that maps destination addresses (or portions of the destination addresses) to that router’s outbound links. When a packet arrives at a router, the router examines the address and searches its forwarding table, using this destination address, to find the appropriate outbound link. The router then directs the packet to this outbound link

We just learned that a router uses a packet’s destination address to index a forwarding table and determine the appropriate outbound link. 

<font style="color:cyan">But this statement begs yet another question: How do forwarding tables get set?</font>

The Internet has a number of special routing protocols that are used to automatically set the forwarding tables. A routing protocol may, for example, determine the shortest path from each router to each destination and use the shortest path results to configure the forwarding tables in the routers.

---
---

## Circuit Switching

In circuit-switched networks, the resources needed along a path (buffers, link transmission rate) to provide for communication between the end systems are <font style="color:lightpink">reserved </font>for the duration of the communication session between the end systems. In packet-switched networks, these resources are not reserved; a session’s messages use the resources on demand and, as a consequence, may have to wait (that is, queue) for access to a communication link.


Traditional telephone networks are examples of circuit-switched networks. There is a bona fide connection for which the switches on the path between the sender and receiver maintain connection state for that connection. In the jargon of telephony, this connection is called a circuit. 

When the network establishes the circuit, it also reserves a constant transmission rate in the network’s links (representing a fraction of each link’s transmission capacity) for the duration of the connection. Since a given transmission rate has been reserved for this sender-to-receiver connection, the sender can transfer the data to the receiver at the guaranteed constant rate. 

![[Pasted image 20220812184942.png]]


Figure 1.13 illustrates a circuit-switched network. In this network, the four circuit switches are interconnected by four links. Each of these links has four circuits, so that each link can support four simultaneous connections. The hosts (for example, PCs and workstations) are each directly connected to one of the switches. When two hosts want to communicate, the network establishes a dedicated end-to-end connection between the two hosts. Thus, in order for Host A to communicate with Host B, the network must first reserve one circuit on each of two links. In this example, the dedicated end-to-end connection uses the second circuit in the first link and the fourth circuit in the second link. Because each link has four circuits, for each link used by the end-to-end connection, the connection gets one fourth of the link’s total transmission capacity for the duration of the connection. Thus, for example, if each link between adjacent switches has a transmission rate of 1 Mbps, then each end-to-end circuit-switch connection gets 250 kbps of dedicated transmission rate.

**Multiplexing in Circuit-Switched Networks:**

A circuit in a link is implemented with 

- <font style="color:violet">Frequency-division multiplexing (FDM) </font>
- <font style="color:violet">Time-division multiplexing (TDM). </font>

 With FDM, the frequency spectrum of a link is divided up among the connections established across the link. Specifically, the link dedicates a frequency band to each connection for the duration of the connection. In telephone networks, this frequency band typically has a width of 4 kHz (that is, 4,000 hertz or 4,000 cycles per second). The width of the band is called, not surprisingly, the bandwidth. FM radio stations also use FDM to share the frequency spectrum between 88 MHz and 108 MHz, with each station being allocated a specific frequency band. 
 
 
 ![[Pasted image 20220812190024.png]]
 
 
 For a TDM link, time is divided into frames of fixed duration, and each frame is divided into a fixed number of time slots. When the network establishes a connection across a link, the network dedicates one time slot in every frame to this connection. These slots are dedicated for the sole use of that connection, with one time slot available for use (in every frame) to transmit the connection’s data.

---

```NUMERICAL PROBLEM :```

```
Let us consider how long it takes to send a file of 640,000 bits from Host A to Host B over a circuit-switched network. Suppose that all links in the network use TDM with 24 slots and have a bit rate of 1.536 Mbps. Also suppose that it takes 500 msec to establish an end-to-end circuit before Host A can begin to transmit the file. How long does it take to send the file? 

Sol: 
Each circuit has a transmission rate of (1.536 Mbps)/24 = 64 kbps, so it takes (640,000 bits)/(64 kbps) = 10 seconds to transmit the file. To this 10 seconds we add the circuit establishment time, giving 10.5 seconds to send the file. 


Note that the transmission time is independent of the number of links: The transmission time would be 10 seconds if the end-to-end circuit passed through one link or a hundred links. 

``` 


---

<font style="color:violet">Difference between Packet Switched network and Circuit Switched Netwok :</font>

| Packet Switched Network | Circuit switched Network |
| ----------------------- | ------------------------ |
| to be filled later      | also this                |

Commit message:

M "Obsidian Vault/.obsidian/workspace"  M "Obsidian Vault/SEMESTER-V/COMPUTER NETWORKS/UNIT-1/2.Access networks.md"  M "Obsidian Vault/SEMESTER-V/COMPUTER NETWORKS/UNIT-1/4.Network core Packet switchingxCircuit switching.md"  M "Obsidian Vault/SEMESTER-V/Machine learning/UNIT-1/1.Learning Problems.md"  M "Obsidian Vault/SEMESTER-V/Machine learning/UNIT-1/Introduction/0.Introduction.md" ?? "Obsidian Vault/Machine learnig CAT 1 preparation.md" ?? "Obsidian Vault/SEMESTER-V/Machine learning/UNIT-1/2.Designing a learning system.md" ?? "Obsidian Vault/SEMESTER-V/Machine learning/UNIT-1/3.Perspective and issues in machine learning.md" ?? "Obsidian Vault/SEMESTER-V/Machine learning/UNIT-1/4.Concept learning.md"

Obsidian Vault/SEMESTER-V/COMPUTER NETWORKS/UNIT-1/4.Network core Packet switchingxCircuit switching.md, after:

# THE NETWORK CORE:

Having examined the Internet’s edge, let us now delve more deeply inside the network core—the mesh of packet switches and links that interconnects the Internet’s end systems.
![[Pasted image 20220808110353.png]]

----
There are two fundamental approaches to moving data through a network of links and switches: 

- <font style="color:violet">Packet switching</font>
- <font style="color:violet">Circuit switching </font>

## Packet switching :
To send a message from a source end system to a destination end system, the source breaks long messages into smaller chunks of data known as <font style="color:lightblue"> packets</font>. 

Between source and destination, each packet travels through communication links and packet switches (for which there are two predominant types, routers and link-layer switches). 

Packets are transmitted over each communication link at a rate equal to the full transmission rate of the link. 

So, if a source end system or a packet switch is 
- Sending  a packet of <font style="color:red"> L</font> bits 
- Over a link with transmission rate <font style="color:red"> R</font> bits/sec, 
- Then the time to transmit the packet is <font style="color:red"> L/R</font> seconds.

<font style="color:ORANGE"> Store-and-Forward Transmission:</font>

Most packet switches use store-and-forward transmission at the inputs to the links. Store-and-forward transmission means that the packet switch must receive the entire packet before it can begin to transmit the first bit of the packet onto the outbound link. 

![[Pasted image 20220808120140.png]]


To explore store-and-forward transmission in more detail, consider a simple network consisting of two end systems connected by a single router, as shown in Figure 1.11. 

A router will typically have many incident links, since its job is to switch an incoming packet onto an outgoing link; in this simple example, the router has the rather simple task of transferring a packet from one (input) link to the only other attached link. In this example, the source has three packets, each consisting of L bits, to send to the destination. At the snapshot of time shown in Figure 1.11, the source has transmitted some of packet 1, and the front of packet 1 has already arrived at the router. Because the router employs store-and-forwarding, at this instant of time, the router cannot transmit the bits it has received; instead it must first <font style="color:pink">buffer</font> (i.e., “store”) the packet’s bits. Only after the router has received all of the packet’s bits can it begin to transmit (i.e., “forward”) the packet onto the outbound link. 


To gain some insight into store-and-forward transmission, 

Let’s now calculate the amount of time that elapses from when the source begins to send the packet until the destination has received the entire packet. ( Ignoring propagation delay—the time it takes for the bits to travel across the wire at near the speed of light.)``

The source begins to transmit at time 0; 
	``	At time L/R seconds, the source has transmitted the entire packet, and the entire packet has been received and stored at the router (since there is no propagation delay). 
	
	``	At time L/R seconds, since the router has just received the entire packet, it can begin to transmit the packet onto the outbound link towards the destination; 
		
    at time 2L/R, the router has transmitted the entire packet, 
    and the entire packet has been received by the destination. 
    Thus, the total delay is 2L/R.

If the switch instead forwarded bits as soon as they arrive (without first receiving the entire packet), then the total delay would be L/R since bits are not held up at the router. But, as we will discuss in Section 1.4, routers need to receive, store, and process the entire packet before forwarding. 

---

<font style="color:coral">Now let’s calculate the amount of time that elapses from when the source begins to send the first packet until the destination has received all three packets.</font> 

As before, at time L/R, the router begins to forward the first packet. But also at time L/R the source will begin to send the second packet, since it has just finished sending the entire first packet. Thus, at time 2L/R, the destination has received the first packet and the router has received the second packet. Similarly, at time 3L/R, the destination has received the first two packets and the router has received the third packet. Finally, at time 4L/R the destination has received all three packets! 

---

Let’s now consider the general case of sending one packet from source to destination over a path consisting of N links each of rate R (thus, there are N-1 routers between source and destination). Applying the same logic as above, we see that the end-to-end delay is: 

   $$d_{end-to-end} =N\frac{L}{R}$$ ---

 ### Queuing Delays and Packet Loss:

Each packet switch has multiple links attached to it. For each attached link, the packet switch has an output buffer (also called an output queue), which stores packets that the router is about to send into that link.

![[Pasted image 20220808130438.png]]

The output buffers play a key role in packet switching. If an arriving packet needs to be transmitted onto a link but finds the link busy with the transmission of another packet, the arriving packet must wait in the output buffer. Thus, in addition to the store-and-forward delays, packets suffer output buffer queuing delays. These delays are variable and depend on the level of congestion in the network. Since the amount of buffer space is finite, an arriving packet may find that the buffer is completely full with other packets waiting for transmission. In this case, <font style="color:lightblue">packet loss</font> will occur—either the arriving packet or one of the already-queued packets will be dropped.

---
### Forwarding Tables and Routing Protocols :

But how does the router determine which link it should forward the packet onto?

Packet forwarding is actually done in different ways in different types of computer networks.

In the Internet, every end system has an address called an IP address. When a source end system wants to send a packet to a destination end system, the source includes the destination’s IP address in the packet’s header. As with postal addresses, this address has a hierarchical structure. When a packet arrives at a router in the network, the router examines a portion of the packet’s destination address and forwards the packet to an adjacent router. More specifically, each router has a <font style="color:lightblue">forwarding table</font> that maps destination addresses (or portions of the destination addresses) to that router’s outbound links. When a packet arrives at a router, the router examines the address and searches its forwarding table, using this destination address, to find the appropriate outbound link. The router then directs the packet to this outbound link

We just learned that a router uses a packet’s destination address to index a forwarding table and determine the appropriate outbound link. 

<font style="color:cyan">But this statement begs yet another question: How do forwarding tables get set?</font>

The Internet has a number of special routing protocols that are used to automatically set the forwarding tables. A routing protocol may, for example, determine the shortest path from each router to each destination and use the shortest path results to configure the forwarding tables in the routers.

---
---

## Circuit Switching

In circuit-switched networks, the resources needed along a path (buffers, link transmission rate) to provide for communication between the end systems are <font style="color:lightpink">reserved </font>for the duration of the communication session between the end systems. In packet-switched networks, these resources are not reserved; a session’s messages use the resources on demand and, as a consequence, may have to wait (that is, queue) for access to a communication link.


Traditional telephone networks are examples of circuit-switched networks. There is a bona fide connection for which the switches on the path between the sender and receiver maintain connection state for that connection. In the jargon of telephony, this connection is called a circuit. 

When the network establishes the circuit, it also reserves a constant transmission rate in the network’s links (representing a fraction of each link’s transmission capacity) for the duration of the connection. Since a given transmission rate has been reserved for this sender-to-receiver connection, the sender can transfer the data to the receiver at the guaranteed constant rate. 

![[Pasted image 20220812184942.png]]


Figure 1.13 illustrates a circuit-switched network. In this network, the four circuit switches are interconnected by four links. Each of these links has four circuits, so that each link can support four simultaneous connections. The hosts (for example, PCs and workstations) are each directly connected to one of the switches. When two hosts want to communicate, the network establishes a dedicated end-to-end connection between the two hosts. Thus, in order for Host A to communicate with Host B, the network must first reserve one circuit on each of two links. In this example, the dedicated end-to-end connection uses the second circuit in the first link and the fourth circuit in the second link. Because each link has four circuits, for each link used by the end-to-end connection, the connection gets one fourth of the link’s total transmission capacity for the duration of the connection. Thus, for example, if each link between adjacent switches has a transmission rate of 1 Mbps, then each end-to-end circuit-switch connection gets 250 kbps of dedicated transmission rate.

**Multiplexing in Circuit-Switched Networks:**

A circuit in a link is implemented with 

- <font style="color:violet">Frequency-division multiplexing (FDM) </font>
- <font style="color:violet">Time-division multiplexing (TDM). </font>

 With FDM, the frequency spectrum of a link is divided up among the connections established across the link. Specifically, the link dedicates a frequency band to each connection for the duration of the connection. In telephone networks, this frequency band typically has a width of 4 kHz (that is, 4,000 hertz or 4,000 cycles per second). The width of the band is called, not surprisingly, the bandwidth. FM radio stations also use FDM to share the frequency spectrum between 88 MHz and 108 MHz, with each station being allocated a specific frequency band. 
 
 
 ![[Pasted image 20220812190024.png]]
 
 
 For a TDM link, time is divided into frames of fixed duration, and each frame is divided into a fixed number of time slots. When the network establishes a connection across a link, the network dedicates one time slot in every frame to this connection. These slots are dedicated for the sole use of that connection, with one time slot available for use (in every frame) to transmit the connection’s data.

---

```NUMERICAL PROBLEM :```

```
Let us consider how long it takes to send a file of 640,000 bits from Host A to Host B over a circuit-switched network. Suppose that all links in the network use TDM with 24 slots and have a bit rate of 1.536 Mbps. Also suppose that it takes 500 msec to establish an end-to-end circuit before Host A can begin to transmit the file. How long does it take to send the file? 

Sol: 
Each circuit has a transmission rate of (1.536 Mbps)/24 = 64 kbps, so it takes (640,000 bits)/(64 kbps) = 10 seconds to transmit the file. To this 10 seconds we add the circuit establishment time, giving 10.5 seconds to send the file. 


Note that the transmission time is independent of the number of links: The transmission time would be 10 seconds if the end-to-end circuit passed through one link or a hundred links. 

``` 


---

<font style="color:violet">Difference between Packet Switched network and Circuit Switched Netwok :</font>

| Packet Switched Network                                                                                                  | Circuit switched Network                                                                                              |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| In Packet switching directly data transfer takes place                                                                   | In-circuit switching has there are 3 phases:  i)Connection Establishment ii) Data Transfer. iii) Connection Released. |
| In Packet switching, each data unit just knows the final destination address intermediate path is decided by the routers | In-circuit switching, each data unit knows the entire path address which is provided by the source.                   |
|                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                       |
